



produced by suzanne shell, gregory margo and pg distributed proofreaders








madam crowl's ghost and the dead sexton


by

joseph sheridan lefanu



both stories were originally published in .




contents

madam crowl's ghost

the dead sexton




madam crowl's ghost


twenty years have passed since you last saw mrs. jolliffe's tall slim
figure. she is now past seventy, and can't have many mile-stones more
to count on the journey that will bring her to her long home. the hair
has grown white as snow, that is parted under her cap, over her
shrewd, but kindly face. but her figure is still straight, and her
step light and active.

she has taken of late years to the care of adult invalids, having
surrendered to younger hands the little people who inhabit cradles,
and crawl on all-fours. those who remember that good-natured face
among the earliest that emerge from the darkness of non-entity, and
who owe to their first lessons in the accomplishment of walking, and a
delighted appreciation of their first babblings and earliest teeth,
have "spired up" into tall lads and lasses, now. some of them shew
streaks of white by this time, in brown locks, "the bonny gouden"
hair, that she was so proud to brush and shew to admiring mothers, who
are seen no more on the green of golden friars, and whose names are
traced now on the flat grey stones in the church-yard.

so the time is ripening some, and searing others; and the saddening
and tender sunset hour has come; and it is evening with the kind old
north-country dame, who nursed pretty laura mildmay, who now stepping
into the room, smiles so gladly, and throws her arms round the old
woman's neck, and kisses her twice.

"now, this is so lucky!" said mrs. jenner, "you have just come in time
to hear a story."

"really! that's delightful."

"na, na, od wite it! no story, ouer true for that, i sid it a wi my
aan eyen. but the barn here, would not like, at these hours, just
goin' to her bed, to hear tell of freets and boggarts."

"ghosts? the very thing of all others i should most likely to hear
of."

"well, dear," said mrs. jenner, "if you are not afraid, sit ye down
here, with us."

"she was just going to tell me all about her first engagement to
attend a dying old woman," says mrs. jenner, "and of the ghost she saw
there. now, mrs. jolliffe, make your tea first, and then begin."

the good woman obeyed, and having prepared a cup of that companionable
nectar, she sipped a little, drew her brows slightly together to
collect her thoughts, and then looked up with a wondrous solemn face
to begin.

good mrs. jenner, and the pretty girl, each gazed with eyes of solemn
expectation in the face of the old woman, who seemed to gather awe
from the recollections she was summoning.

the old room was a good scene for such a narrative, with the
oak-wainscoting, quaint, and clumsy furniture, the heavy beams that
crossed its ceiling, and the tall four-post bed, with dark curtains,
within which you might imagine what shadows you please.

mrs. jolliffe cleared her voice, rolled her eyes slowly round, and
began her tale in these words:--

madam crowl's ghost

"i'm an ald woman now, and i was but thirteen, my last birthday, the
night i came to applewale house. my aunt was the housekeeper there,
and a sort o' one-horse carriage was down at lexhoe waitin' to take me
and my box up to applewale.

"i was a bit frightened by the time i got to lexhoe, and when i saw
the carriage and horse, i wished myself back again with my mother at
hazelden. i was crying when i got into the 'shay'--that's what we used
to call it--and old john mulbery that drove it, and was a good-natured
fellow, bought me a handful of apples at the golden lion to cheer me
up a bit; and he told me that there was a currant-cake, and tea, and
pork-chops, waiting for me, all hot, in my aunt's room at the great
house. it was a fine moonlight night, and i eat the apples, lookin'
out o' the shay winda.

"it's a shame for gentlemen to frighten a poor foolish child like i
was. i sometimes think it might be tricks. there was two on 'em on the
tap o' the coach beside me. and they began to question me after
nightfall, when the moon rose, where i was going to. well, i told them
it was to wait on dame arabella crowl, of applewale house, near by
lexhoe.

"'ho, then,' says one of them, 'you'll not be long there!'

"and i looked at him as much as to say 'why not?' for i had spoken out
when i told them where i was goin', as if 'twas something clever i hed
to say.

"'because,' says he, 'and don't you for your life tell no one, only
watch her and see--she's possessed by the devil, and more an half a
ghost. have you got a bible?'

"'yes, sir,' says i. for my mother put my little bible in my box, and
i knew it was there: and by the same token, though the print's too
small for my ald eyes, i have it in my press to this hour.

"as i looked up at him saying 'yes, sir,' i thought i saw him winkin'
at his friend; but i could not be sure.

"'well,' says he, 'be sure you put it under your bolster every night,
it will keep the ald girl's claws aff ye.'

"and i got such a fright when he said that, you wouldn't fancy! and
i'd a liked to ask him a lot about the ald lady, but i was too shy,
and he and his friend began talkin' together about their own consarns,
and dowly enough i got down, as i told ye, at lexhoe. my heart sank as
i drove into the dark avenue. the trees stand very thick and big, as
ald as the ald house almost, and four people, with their arms out and
finger-tips touchin', barely girds round some of them.

"well my neck was stretched out o' the winda, looking for the first
view o' the great house; and all at once we pulled up in front of it.

"a great white-and-black house it is, wi' great black beams across and
right up it, and gables lookin' out, as white as a sheet, to the moon,
and the shadows o' the trees, two or three up and down in front, you
could count the leaves on them, and all the little diamond-shaped
winda-panes, glimmering on the great hall winda, and great shutters,
in the old fashion, hinged on the wall outside, boulted across all the
rest o' the windas in front, for there was but three or four servants,
and the old lady in the house, and most o' t' rooms was locked up.

"my heart was in my mouth when i sid the journey was over, and this
the great house afoore me, and i sa near my aunt that i never sid till
noo, and dame crowl, that i was come to wait upon, and was afeard on
already.

"my aunt kissed me in the hall, and brought me to her room. she was
tall and thin, wi' a pale face and black eyes, and long thin hands wi'
black mittins on. she was past fifty, and her word was short; but her
word was law. i hev no complaints to make of her; but she was a hard
woman, and i think she would hev bin kinder to me if i had bin her
sister's child in place of her brother's. but all that's o' no
consequence noo.

"the squire--his name was mr. chevenix crowl, he was dame crowl's
grandson--came down there, by way of seeing that the old lady was well
treated, about twice or thrice in the year. i sid him but twice all
the time i was at applewale house.

"i can't say but she was well taken care of, notwithstanding; but that
was because my aunt and meg wyvern, that was her maid, had a
conscience, and did their duty by her.

"mrs. wyvern--meg wyvern my aunt called her to herself, and mrs.
wyvern to me--was a fat, jolly lass of fifty, a good height and a good
breadth, always good-humoured and walked slow. she had fine wages, but
she was a bit stingy, and kept all her fine clothes under lock and
key, and wore, mostly, a twilled chocolate cotton, wi' red, and
yellow, and green sprigs and balls on it, and it lasted wonderful.

"she never gave me nout, not the vally o' a brass thimble, all the
time i was there; but she was good-humoured, and always laughin', and
she talked no end o' proas over her tea; and, seeing me sa sackless
and dowly, she roused me up wi' her laughin' and stories; and i think
i liked her better than my aunt--children is so taken wi' a bit o' fun
or a story--though my aunt was very good to me, but a hard woman about
some things, and silent always.

"my aunt took me into her bed-chamber, that i might rest myself a bit
while she was settin' the tea in her room. but first, she patted me on
the shouther, and said i was a tall lass o' my years, and had spired
up well, and asked me if i could do plain work and stitchin'; and she
looked in my face, and said i was like my father, her brother, that
was dead and gone, and she hoped i was a better christian, and wad na
du a' that lids (would not do anything of that sort).

"it was a hard sayin' the first time i set foot in her room, i
thought.

"when i went into the next room, the housekeeper's room--very
comfortable, yak (oak) all round--there was a fine fire blazin' away,
wi' coal, and peat, and wood, all in a low together, and tea on the
table, and hot cake, and smokin' meat; and there was mrs. wyvern, fat,
jolly, and talkin' away, more in an hour than my aunt would in a year.

"while i was still at my tea my aunt went up-stairs to see madam
crowl.

"'she's agone up to see that old judith squailes is awake,' says mrs.
wyvern. 'judith sits with madam crowl when me and mrs. shutters'--that
was my aunt's name--'is away. she's a troublesome old lady. ye'll hev
to be sharp wi' her, or she'll be into the fire, or out o' t' winda.
she goes on wires, she does, old though she be.'

"'how old, ma'am?' says i.

"'ninety-three her last birthday, and that's eight months gone,' says
she; and she laughed. 'and don't be askin' questions about her before
your aunt--mind, i tell ye; just take her as you find her, and that's
all.'

"'and what's to be my business about her, please, ma'am?' says i.

"'about the old lady? well,' says she, 'your aunt, mrs. shutters, will
tell you that; but i suppose you'll hev to sit in the room with your
work, and see she's at no mischief, and let her amuse herself with her
things on the table, and get her her food or drink as she calls for
it, and keep her out o' mischief, and ring the bell hard if she's
troublesome.'

"'is she deaf, ma'am?'

"'no, nor blind,' says she; 'as sharp as a needle, but she's gone
quite aupy, and can't remember nout rightly; and jack the giant
killer, or goody twoshoes will please her as well as the king's court,
or the affairs of the nation.'

"'and what did the little girl go away for, ma'am, that went on friday
last? my aunt wrote to my mother she was to go.'

"'yes; she's gone.'

"'what for?' says i again.

"'she didn't answer mrs. shutters, i do suppose,' says she. 'i don't
know. don't be talkin'; your aunt can't abide a talkin' child.'

"'and please, ma'am, is the old lady well in health?' says i.

"'it ain't no harm to ask that,' says she. 'she's torflin a bit
lately, but better this week past, and i dare say she'll last out her
hundred years yet. hish! here's your aunt coming down the passage.'

"in comes my aunt, and begins talkin' to mrs. wyvern, and i, beginnin'
to feel more comfortable and at home like, was walkin' about the room
lookin' at this thing and at that. there was pretty old china things
on the cupboard, and pictures again the wall; and there was a door
open in the wainscot, and i sees a queer old leathern jacket, wi'
straps and buckles to it, and sleeves as long as the bed-post hangin'
up inside.

"'what's that you're at, child?' says my aunt, sharp enough, turning
about when i thought she least minded. 'what's that in your hand?'

"'this, ma'am?' says i, turning about with the leathern jacket. 'i
don't know what it is, ma'am.'

"pale as she was, the red came up in her cheeks, and her eyes flashed
wi' anger, and i think only she had half a dozen steps to take,
between her and me, she'd a gev me a sizzup. but she did gie me a
shake by the shouther, and she plucked the thing out o' my hand, and
says she, 'while ever you stay here, don't ye meddle wi' nout that
don't belong to ye', and she hung it up on the pin that was there, and
shut the door wi' a bang and locked it fast.

"mrs. wyvern was liftin' up her hands and laughin' all this time,
quietly, in her chair, rolling herself a bit in it, as she used when
she was kinkin'.

"the tears was in my eyes, and she winked at my aunt, and says she,
dryin' her own eyes that was wet wi' the laughin', 'tut, the child
meant no harm--come here to me, child. it's only a pair o' crutches
for lame ducks, and ask us no questions mind, and we'll tell ye no
lies; and come here and sit down, and drink a mug o' beer before ye go
to your bed.'

"my room, mind ye, was upstairs, next to the old lady's, and mrs.
wyvern's bed was near hers in her room, and i was to be ready at call,
if need should be.

"the old lady was in one of her tantrums that night and part of the
day before. she used to take fits o' the sulks. sometimes she would
not let them dress her, and at other times she would not let them take
her clothes off. she was a great beauty, they said, in her day. but
there was no one about applewale that remembered her in her prime. and
she was dreadful fond o' dress, and had thick silks, and stiff satins,
and velvets, and laces, and all sorts, enough to set up seven shops at
the least. all her dresses was old-fashioned and queer, but worth a
fortune.

"well, i went to my bed. i lay for a while awake; for a' things was
new to me; and i think the tea was in my nerves, too, for i wasn't
used to it, except now and then on a holiday, or the like. and i heard
mrs. wyvern talkin', and i listened with my hand to my ear; but i
could not hear mrs. crowl, and i don't think she said a word.

"there was great care took of her. the people at applewale knew that
when she died they would every one get the sack; and their situations
was well paid and easy.

"the doctor came twice a week to see the old lady, and you  be sure
they all did as he bid them. one thing was the same every time; they
were never to cross or frump her, any way, but to humour and please
her in everything.

"so she lay in her clothes all that night, and next day, not a word
she said, and i was at my needlework all that day, in my own room,
except when i went down to my dinner.

"i would a liked to see the ald lady, and even to hear her speak. but
she might as well a' bin in lunnon a' the time for me.

"when i had my dinner my aunt sent me out for a walk for an hour. i
was glad when i came back, the trees was so big, and the place so dark
and lonesome, and 'twas a cloudy day, and i cried a deal, thinkin' of
home, while i was walkin' alone there. that evening, the candles bein'
alight, i was sittin' in my room, and the door was open into madam
crowl's chamber, where my aunt was. it was, then, for the first time i
heard what i suppose was the ald lady talking.

"it was a queer noise like, i couldn't well say which, a bird, or a
beast, only it had a bleatin' sound in it, and was very small.

"i pricked my ears to hear all i could. but i could not make out one
word she said. and my aunt answered:

"'the evil one can't hurt no one, ma'am, bout the lord permits.'

"then the same queer voice from the bed says something more that i
couldn't make head nor tail on.

"and my aunt med answer again: 'let them pull faces, ma'am, and say
what they will; if the lord be for us, who can be against us?'

"i kept listenin' with my ear turned to the door, holdin' my breath,
but not another word or sound came in from the room. in about twenty
minutes, as i was sittin' by the table, lookin' at the pictures in the
old aesop's fables, i was aware o' something moving at the door, and
lookin' up i sid my aunt's face lookin' in at the door, and her hand
raised.

"'hish!' says she, very soft, and comes over to me on tiptoe, and she
says in a whisper: 'thank god, she's asleep at last, and don't ye make
no noise till i come back, for i'm goin' down to take my cup o' tea,
and i'll be back i' noo--me and mrs. wyvern, and she'll be sleepin' in
the room, and you can run down when we come up, and judith will gie ye
yaur supper in my room.'

"and with that she goes.

"i kep' looking at the picture-book, as before, listenin' every noo
and then, but there was no sound, not a breath, that i could hear; an'
i began whisperin' to the pictures and talkin' to myself to keep my
heart up, for i was growin' feared in that big room.

"and at last up i got, and began walkin' about the room, lookin' at
this and peepin' at that, to amuse my mind, ye'll understand. and at
last what sud i do but peeps into madam crowl's bedchamber.

"a grand chamber it was, wi' a great four-poster, wi' flowered silk
curtains as tall as the ceilin', and foldin' down on the floor, and
drawn close all round. there was a lookin'-glass, the biggest i ever
sid before, and the room was a blaze o' light. i counted twenty-two
wax candles, all alight. such was her fancy, and no one dared say her
nay.

"i listened at the door, and gaped and wondered all round. when i
heard there was not a breath, and did not see so much as a stir in the
curtains, i took heart, and walked into the room on tiptoe, and looked
round again. then i takes a keek at myself in the big glass; and at
last it came in my head, 'why couldn't i ha' a keek at the ald lady
herself in the bed?

"ye'd think me a fule if ye knew half how i longed to see dame crowl,
and i thought to myself if i didn't peep now i might wait many a day
before i got so gude a chance again.

"well, my dear, i came to the side o' the bed, the curtains bein'
close, and my heart a'most failed me. but i took courage, and i slips
my finger in between the thick curtains, and then my hand. so i waits
a bit, but all was still as death. so, softly, softly i draws the
curtain, and there, sure enough, i sid before me, stretched out like
the painted lady on the tomb-stean in lexhoe church, the famous dame
crowl, of applewale house. there she was, dressed out. you never sid
the like in they days. satin and silk, and scarlet and green, and gold
and pint lace; by jen! 'twas a sight! a big powdered wig, half as high
as herself, was a-top o' her head, and, wow!--was ever such
wrinkles?--and her old baggy throat all powdered white, and her cheeks
rouged, and mouse-skin eyebrows, that mrs. wyvern used to stick on, and
there she lay proud and stark, wi' a pair o' clocked silk hose on, and
heels to her shoon as tall as nine-pins. lawk! but her nose was
crooked and thin, and half the whites o' her eyes was open. she used
to stand, dressed as she was, gigglin' and dribblin' before the
lookin'-glass, wi' a fan in her hand and a big nosegay in her bodice.
her wrinkled little hands was stretched down by her sides, and such
long nails, all cut into points, i never sid in my days. could it even
a bin the fashion for grit fowk to wear their fingernails so?

"well, i think ye'd a-bin frightened yourself if ye'd a sid such a
sight. i couldn't let go the curtain, nor move an inch, nor take my
eyes off her; my very heart stood still. and in an instant she opens
her eyes and up she sits, and spins herself round, and down wi' her,
wi' a clack on her two tall heels on the floor, facin' me, ogglin' in
my face wi' her two great glassy eyes, and a wicked simper wi' her
wrinkled lips, and lang fause teeth.

"well, a corpse is a natural thing; but this was the dreadfullest
sight i ever sid. she had her fingers straight out pointin' at me, and
her back was crooked, round again wi' age. says she:

"'ye little limb! what for did ye say i killed the boy? i'll tickle ye
till ye're stiff!'

"if i'd a thought an instant, i'd a turned about and run. but i
couldn't take my eyes off her, and i backed from her as soon as i
could; and she came clatterin' after like a thing on wires, with her
fingers pointing to my throat, and she makin' all the time a sound
with her tongue like zizz-zizz-zizz.

"i kept backin' and backin' as quick as i could, and her fingers was
only a few inches away from my throat, and i felt i'd lose my wits if
she touched me.

"i went back this way, right into the corner, and i gev a yellock,
ye'd think saul and body was partin', and that minute my aunt, from
the door, calls out wi' a blare, and the ald lady turns round on her,
and i turns about, and ran through my room, and down the stairs, as
hard as my legs could carry me.

"i cried hearty, i can tell you, when i got down to the housekeeper's
room. mrs. wyvern laughed a deal when i told her what happened. but
she changed her key when she heard the ald lady's words.

"'say them again,' says she.

"so i told her.

"'ye little limb! what for did ye say i killed the boy? i'll tickle ye
till ye're stiff.'

"'and did ye say she killed a boy?' says she.

"'not i, ma'am,' says i.

"judith was always up with me, after that, when the two elder women was
away from her. i would a jumped out at winda, rather than stay alone
in the same room wi' her.

"it was about a week after, as well as i can remember, mrs. wyvern,
one day when me and her was alone, told me a thing about madam crowl
that i did not know before.

"she being young and a great beauty, full seventy year before, had
married squire crowl, of applewale. but he was a widower, and had a
son about nine years old.

"there never was tale or tidings of this boy after one mornin'. no one
could say where he went to. he was allowed too much liberty, and used
to be off in the morning, one day, to the keeper's cottage and
breakfast wi' him, and away to the warren, and not home, mayhap, till
evening; and another time down to the lake, and bathe there, and spend
the day fishin' there, or paddlin' about in the boat. well, no one
could say what was gone wi' him; only this, that his hat was found by
the lake, under a haathorn that grows thar to this day, and 'twas
thought he was drowned bathin'. and the squire's son, by his second
marriage, with this madam crowl that lived sa dreadful lang, came in
far the estates. it was his son, the ald lady's grandson, squire
chevenix crowl, that owned the estates at the time i came to
applewale.

"there was a deal o' talk lang before my aunt's time about it; and
'twas said the step-mother knew more than she was like to let out. and
she managed her husband, the ald squire, wi' her white-heft and
flatteries. and as the boy was never seen more, in course of time the
thing died out of fowks' minds.

"i'm goin' to tell ye noo about what i sid wi' my own een.

"i was not there six months, and it was winter time, when the ald lady
took her last sickness.

"the doctor was afeard she might a took a fit o' madness, as she did
fifteen years befoore, and was buckled up, many a time, in a
strait-waistcoat, which was the very leathern jerkin i sid in the
closet, off my aunt's room.

"well, she didn't. she pined, and windered, and went off, torflin',
torflin', quiet enough, till a day or two before her flittin', and
then she took to rabblin', and sometimes skirlin' in the bed, ye'd
think a robber had a knife to her throat, and she used to work out o'
the bed, and not being strong enough, then, to walk or stand, she'd
fall on the flure, wi' her ald wizened hands stretched before her
face, and skirlin' still for mercy.

"ye  guess i didn't go into the room, and i used to be shiverin' in
my bed wi' fear, at her skirlin' and scrafflin' on the flure, and
blarin' out words that id make your skin turn blue.

"my aunt, and mrs. wyvern, and judith squailes, and a woman from
lexhoe, was always about her. at last she took fits, and they wore her
out.

"t' sir was there, and prayed for her; but she was past praying with.
i suppose it was right, but none could think there was much good in
it, and sa at lang last she made her flittin', and a' was over, and
old dame crowl was shrouded and coffined, and squire chevenix was
wrote for. but he was away in france, and the delay was sa lang, that
t' sir and doctor both agreed it would not du to keep her langer out
o' her place, and no one cared but just them two, and my aunt and the
rest o' us, from applewale, to go to the buryin'. so the old lady of
applewale was laid in the vault under lexhoe church; and we lived up
at the great house till such time as the squire should come to tell
his will about us, and pay off such as he chose to discharge.

"i was put into another room, two doors away from what was dame
crowl's chamber, after her death, and this thing happened the night
before squire chevenix came to applewale.

"the room i was in now was a large square chamber, covered wi' yak
pannels, but unfurnished except for my bed, which had no curtains to
it, and a chair and a table, or so, that looked nothing at all in such
a big room. and the big looking-glass, that the old lady used to keek
into and admire herself from head to heel, now that there was na mair
o' that wark, was put out of the way, and stood against the wall in my
room, for there was shiftin' o' many things in her chamber ye 
suppose, when she came to be coffined.

"the news had come that day that the squire was to be down next
morning at applewale; and not sorry was i, for i thought i was sure to
be sent home again to my mother. and right glad was i, and i was
thinkin' of a' at hame, and my sister janet, and the kitten and the
pymag, and trimmer the tike, and all the rest, and i got sa fidgetty,
i couldn't sleep, and the clock struck twelve, and me wide awake, and
the room as dark as pick. my back was turned to the door, and my eyes
toward the wall opposite.

"well, it could na be a full quarter past twelve, when i sees a
lightin' on the wall befoore me, as if something took fire behind, and
the shadas o' the bed, and the chair, and my gown, that was hangin'
from the wall, was dancin' up and down on the ceilin' beams and the
yak pannels; and i turns my head ower my shouther quick, thinkin'
something must a gone a' fire.

"and what sud i see, by jen! but the likeness o' the ald beldame,
bedizened out in her satins and velvets, on her dead body, simperin',
wi' her eyes as wide as saucers, and her face like the fiend himself.
'twas a red light that rose about her in a fuffin low, as if her dress
round her feet was blazin'. she was drivin' on right for me, wi' her
ald shrivelled hands crooked as if she was goin' to claw me. i could
not stir, but she passed me straight by, wi' a blast o' cald air, and
i sid her, at the wall, in the alcove as my aunt used to call it,
which was a recess where the state bed used to stand in ald times wi'
a door open wide, and her hands gropin' in at somethin' was there. i
never sid that door befoore. and she turned round to me, like a thing
on a pivot, flyrin', and all at once the room was dark, and i standin'
at the far side o' the bed; i don't know how i got there, and i found
my tongue at last, and if i did na blare a yellock, rennin' down the
gallery and almost pulled mrs. wyvern's door off t' hooks, and
frighted her half out o' wits.

"ye  guess i did na sleep that night; and wi' the first light, down
wi' me to my aunt, as fast as my two legs cud carry me.

"well my aunt did na frump or flite me, as i thought she would, but
she held me by the hand, and looked hard in my face all the time. and
she telt me not to be feared; and says she:

"'hed the appearance a key in its hand?'

"'yes,' says i, bringin' it to mind, 'a big key in a queer brass
handle.'

"'stop a bit,' says she, lettin' go ma hand, and openin' the
cupboard-door. 'was it like this?' says she, takin' one out in her
fingers, and showing it to me, with a dark look in my face.

"'that was it,' says i, quick enough.

"'are ye sure?' she says, turnin' it round.

"'sart,' says i, and i felt like i was gain' to faint when i sid it.

"'well, that will do, child,' says she, saftly thinkin', and she
locked it up again.

"'the squire himself will be here today, before twelve o'clock, and ye
must tell him all about it,' says she, thinkin', 'and i suppose i'll
be leavin' soon, and so the best thing for the present is, that ye
should go home this afternoon, and i'll look out another place for you
when i can.'

"fain was i, ye  guess, at that word.

"my aunt packed up my things for me, and the three pounds that was due
to me, to bring home, and squire crowl himself came down to applewale
that day, a handsome man, about thirty years ald. it was the second
time i sid him. but this was the first time he spoke to me.

"my aunt talked wi' him in the housekeeper's room, and i don't know
what they said. i was a bit feared on the squire, he bein' a great
gentleman down in lexhoe, and i darn't go near till i was called. and
says he, smilin':

"'what's a' this ye a sen, child? it mun be a dream, for ye know
there's na sic a thing as a bo or a freet in a' the world. but
whatever it was, ma little maid, sit ye down and tell all about it
from first to last.'

"well, so soon as i made an end, he thought a bit, and says he to my
aunt:

"'i mind the place well. in old sir olivur's time lame wyndel told me
there was a door in that recess, to the left, where the lassie dreamed
she saw my grandmother open it. he was past eighty when he told me
that, and i but a boy. it's twenty year sen. the plate and jewels used
to be kept there, long ago, before the iron closet was made in the
arras chamber, and he told me the key had a brass handle, and this ye
say was found in the bottom o' the kist where she kept her old fans.
now, would not it be a queer thing if we found some spoons or diamonds
forgot there? ye mun come up wi' us, lassie, and point to the very
spot.'

"loth was i, and my heart in my mouth, and fast i held by my aunt's
hand as i stept into that awsome room, and showed them both how she
came and passed me by, and the spot where she stood, and where the
door seemed to open.

"there was an ald empty press against the wall then, and shoving it
aside, sure enough there was the tracing of a door in the wainscot,
and a keyhole stopped with wood, and planed across as smooth as the
rest, and the joining of the door all stopped wi' putty the colour o'
yak, and, but for the hinges that showed a bit when the press was
shoved aside, ye would not consayt there was a door there at all.

"'ha!' says he, wi' a queer smile, 'this looks like it.'

"it took some minutes wi' a small chisel and hammer to pick the bit o'
wood out o' the keyhole. the key fitted, sure enough, and, wi' a
strang twist and a lang skreak, the boult went back and he pulled the
door open.

"there was another door inside, stranger than the first, but the lacks
was gone, and it opened easy. inside was a narrow floor and walls and
vault o' brick; we could not see what was in it, for 'twas dark as
pick.

"when my aunt had lighted the candle, the squire held it up and stept
in.

"my aunt stood on tiptoe tryin' to look over his shouther, and i did
na see nout.

"'ha! ha!' says the squire, steppin' backward. 'what's that? gi' ma
the poker--quick!' says he to my aunt. and as she went to the hearth i
peeps beside his arm, and i sid squat down in the far corner a monkey
or a flayin' on the chest, or else the maist shrivelled up, wizzened
ald wife that ever was sen on yearth.

"'by jen!' says my aunt, as puttin' the poker in his hand, she keeked
by his shouther, and sid the ill-favoured thing, 'hae a care, sir,
what ye're doin'. back wi' ye, and shut to the door!'

"but in place o' that he steps in saftly, wi' the poker pointed like a
swoord, and he gies it a poke, and down it a' tumbles together, head
and a', in a heap o' bayans and dust, little meyar an' a hatful.

"'twas the bayans o' a child; a' the rest went to dust at a touch.
they said nout for a while, but he turns round the skull, as it lay on
the floor.

"young as i was, i consayted i knew well enough what they was thinkin'
on.

"'a dead cat!' says he, pushin' back and blowin' out the can'le, and
shuttin' to the door. 'we'll come back, you and me, mrs. shutters, and
look on the shelves by-and-bye. i've other matters first to speak to
ye about; and this little girl's goin' hame, ye say. she has her
wages, and i mun mak' her a present,' says he, pattin' my shouther wi'
his hand.

"and he did gimma a goud pound and i went aff to lexhoe about an hour
after, and sa hame by the stage-coach, and fain was i to be at hame
again; and i never sid dame crowl o' applewale, god be thanked, either
in appearance or in dream, at-efter. but when i was grown to be a
woman, my aunt spent a day and night wi' me at littleham, and she telt
me there was no doubt it was the poor little boy that was missing sa
lang sen, that was shut up to die thar in the dark by that wicked
beldame, whar his skirls, or his prayers, or his thumpin' cud na be
heard, and his hat was left by the water's edge, whoever did it, to
mak' belief he was drowned. the clothes, at the first touch, a' ran
into a snuff o' dust in the cell whar the bayans was found. but there
was a handful o' jet buttons, and a knife with a green heft, together
wi' a couple o' pennies the poor little fella had in his pocket, i
suppose, when he was decoyed in thar, and sid his last o' the light.
and there was, amang the squire's papers, a copy o' the notice that
was prented after he was lost, when the ald squire thought he might 'a
run away, or bin took by gipsies, and it said he had a green-hefted
knife wi' him, and that his buttons were o' cut jet. sa that is a' i
hev to say consarnin' ald dame crowl, o' applewale house."




the dead sexton


the sunsets were red, the nights were long, and the weather pleasantly
frosty; and christmas, the glorious herald of the new year, was at
hand, when an event--still recounted by winter firesides, with a
horror made delightful by the mellowing influence of years--occurred
in the beautiful little town of golden friars, and signalized, as the
scene of its catastrophe, the old inn known throughout a wide region
of the northumbrian counties as the george and dragon.

toby crooke, the sexton, was lying dead in the old coach-house in the
inn yard. the body had been discovered, only half an hour before this
story begins, under strange circumstances, and in a place where it
might have lain the better part of a week undisturbed; and a dreadful
suspicion astounded the village of golden friars.

a wintry sunset was glaring through a gorge of the western mountains,
turning into fire the twigs of the leafless elms, and all the tiny
blades of grass on the green by which the quaint little town is
surrounded. it is built of light, grey stone, with steep gables and
slender chimneys rising with airy lightness from the level sward by
the margin of the beautiful lake, and backed by the grand amphitheatre
of the fells at the other side, whose snowy peaks show faintly against
the sky, tinged with the vaporous red of the western light. as you
descend towards the margin of the lake, and see golden friars, its
taper chimneys and slender gables, its curious old inn and gorgeous
sign, and over all the graceful tower and spire of the ancient church,
at this hour or by moonlight, in the solemn grandeur and stillness of
the natural scenery that surrounds it, it stands before you like a
fairy town.

toby crooke, the lank sexton, now fifty or upwards, had passed an hour
or two with some village cronies, over a solemn pot of purl, in the
kitchen of that cosy hostelry, the night before. he generally turned
in there at about seven o'clock, and heard the news. this contented
him: for he talked little, and looked always surly.

many things are now raked up and talked over about him.

in early youth, he had been a bit of a scamp. he broke his indentures,
and ran away from his master, the tanner of bryemere; he had got into
fifty bad scrapes and out again; and, just as the little world of
golden friars had come to the conclusion that it would be well for all
parties--except, perhaps, himself--and a happy riddance for his
afflicted mother, if he were sunk, with a gross of quart pots about
his neck, in the bottom of the lake in which the grey gables, the
elms, and the towering fells of golden friars are mirrored, he
suddenly returned, a reformed man at the ripe age of forty.

for twelve years he had disappeared, and no one knew what had become
of him. then, suddenly, as i say, he reappeared at golden friars--a
very black and silent man, sedate and orderly. his mother was dead and
buried; but the "prodigal son" was received good-naturedly. the good
vicar, doctor jenner, reported to his wife:

"his hard heart has been softened, dear dolly. i saw him dry his eyes,
poor fellow, at the sermon yesterday."

"i don't wonder, hugh darling. i know the part--'there is joy in
heaven.' i am sure it was--wasn't it? it was quite beautiful. i almost
cried myself."

the vicar laughed gently, and stooped over her chair and kissed her,
and patted her cheek fondly.

"you think too well of your old man's sermons," he said. "i preach,
you see, dolly, very much to the _poor_. if _they_ understand me, i am
pretty sure everyone else must; and i think that my simple style goes
more home to both feelings and conscience--"

"you ought to have told me of his crying before. you _are_ so
eloquent," exclaimed dolly jenner. "no one preaches like my man. i
have never heard such sermons."

not many, we  be sure; for the good lady had not heard more than
six from any other divine for the last twenty years.

the personages of golden friars talked toby crooke over on his return.
doctor lincote said:

"he must have led a hard life; he had _dried in_ so, and got a good
deal of hard muscle; and he rather fancied he had been soldiering--he
stood like a soldier; and the mark over his right eye looked like a
gunshot."

people might wonder how he could have survived a gunshot over the eye;
but was not lincote a doctor--and an army doctor to boot--when he was
young; and who, in golden friars, could dispute with him on points of
surgery? and i believe the truth is, that this mark had been really
made by a pistol bullet.

mr. jarlcot, the attorney, would "go bail" he had picked up some sense
in his travels; and honest turnbull, the host of the george and
dragon, said heartily:

"we must look out something for him to put his hand to. _now's_ the
time to make a man of him."

the end of it was that he became, among other things, the sexton of
golden friars.

he was a punctual sexton. he meddled with no other person's business;
but he was a silent man, and by no means popular. he was reserved in
company; and he used to walk alone by the shore of the lake, while
other fellows played at fives or skittles; and when he visited the
kitchen of the george, he had his liquor to himself, and in the midst
of the general talk was a saturnine listener. there was something
sinister in this man's face; and when things went wrong with him, he
could look dangerous enough.

there were whispered stories in golden friars about toby crooke.
nobody could say how they got there. nothing is more mysterious than
the spread of rumour. it is like a vial poured on the air. it travels,
like an epidemic, on the sightless currents of the atmosphere, or by
the laws of a telluric influence equally intangible. these stories
treated, though darkly, of the long period of his absence from his
native village; but they took no well-defined shape, and no one could
refer them to any authentic source.

the vicar's charity was of the kind that thinketh no evil; and in such
cases he always insisted on proof. crooke was, of course, undisturbed
in his office.

on the evening before the tragedy came to light--trifles are always
remembered after the catastrophe--a boy, returning along the margin of
the mere, passed him by seated on a prostrate trunk of a tree, under
the "bield" of a rock, counting silver money. his lean body and limbs
were bent together, his knees were up to his chin, and his long
fingers were telling the coins over hurriedly in the hollow of his
other hand. he glanced at the boy, as the old english saying is, like
"the devil looking over lincoln." but a black and sour look from mr.
crooke, who never had a smile for a child nor a greeting for a
wayfarer, was nothing strange.

toby crooke lived in the grey stone house, cold and narrow, that
stands near the church porch, with the window of its staircase looking
out into the churchyard, where so much of his labour, for many a day,
had been expended. the greater part of this house was untenanted.

the old woman who was in charge of it slept in a settle-bed, among
broken stools, old sacks, rotten chests and other rattle-traps, in the
small room at the rear of the house, floored with tiles.

at what time of the night she could not tell, she awoke, and saw a
man, with his hat on, in her room. he had a candle in his hand, which
he shaded with his coat from her eye; his back was towards her, and he
was rummaging in the drawer in which she usually kept her money.

having got her quarter's pension of two pounds that day, however, she
had placed it, folded in a rag, in the corner of her tea caddy, and
locked it up in the "eat-malison" or cupboard.

she was frightened when she saw the figure in her room, and she could
not tell whether her visitor might not have made his entrance from the
contiguous churchyard. so, sitting bolt upright in her bed, her grey
hair almost lifting her kerchief off her head, and all over in "a fit
o' t' creepins," as she expressed it, she demanded:

"in god's name, what want ye thar?"

"whar's the peppermint ye used to hev by ye, woman? i'm bad wi' an
inward pain."

"it's all gane a month sin'," she answered; and offered to make him a
"het" drink if he'd get to his room.

but he said:

"never mind, i'll try a mouthful o' gin."

and, turning on his heel, he left her.

in the morning the sexton was gone. not only in his lodging was there
no account of him, but, when inquiry began to be extended, nowhere in
the village of golden friars could he be found.

still he might have gone off, on business of his own, to some distant
village, before the town was stirring; and the sexton had no near
kindred to trouble their heads about him. people, therefore, were
willing to wait, and take his return ultimately for granted.

at three o'clock the good vicar, standing at his hall door, looking
across the lake towards the noble fells that rise, steep and furrowed,
from that beautiful mere, saw two men approaching across the green, in
a straight line, from a boat that was moored at the water's edge. they
were carrying between them something which, though not very large,
seemed ponderous.

"ye'll ken this, sir," said one of the boatmen as they set down,
almost at his feet, a small church bell, such as in old-fashioned
chimes yields the treble notes.

"this won't be less nor five stean. i ween it's fra' the church
steeple yon."

"what! one of our church bells?" ejaculated the vicar--for a moment
lost in horrible amazement. "oh, no!--_no_, that can't possibly be!
where did you find it?"

he had found the boat, in the morning, moored about fifty yards from
her moorings where he had left it the night before, and could not
think how that came to pass; and now, as he and his partner were about
to take their oars, they discovered this bell in the bottom of the
boat, under a bit of canvas, also the sexton's pick and
spade--"tom-spey'ad," they termed that peculiar, broad-bladed
implement.

"very extraordinary! we must try whether there is a bell missing from
the tower," said the vicar, getting into a fuss. "has crooke come back
yet? does anyone know where he is?"

the sexton had not yet turned up.

"that's odd--that's provoking," said the vicar. "however, my key will
let us in. place the bell in the hall while i get it; and then we can
see what all this means."

to the church, accordingly, they went, the vicar leading the way, with
his own key in his hand. he turned it in the lock, and stood in the
shadow of the ground porch, and shut the door.

a sack, half full, lay on the ground, with open mouth, a piece of cord
lying beside it. something clanked within it as one of the men shoved
it aside with his clumsy shoe.

the vicar opened the church door and peeped in. the dusky glow from
the western sky, entering through a narrow window, illuminated the
shafts and arches, the old oak carvings, and the discoloured
monuments, with the melancholy glare of a dying fire.

the vicar withdrew his head and closed the door. the gloom of the
porch was deeper than ever as, stooping, he entered the narrow door
that opened at the foot of the winding stair that leads to the first
loft; from which a rude ladder-stair of wood, some five and twenty
feet in height, mounts through a trap to the ringers' loft.

up the narrow stairs the vicar climbed, followed by his attendants, to
the first loft. it was very dark: a narrow bow-slit in the thick wall
admitted the only light they had to guide them. the ivy leaves, seen
from the deep shadow, flashed and flickered redly, and the sparrows
twittered among them.

"will one of you be so good as to go up and count the bells, and see
if they are all right?" said the vicar. "there should be--"

"agoy! what's that?" exclaimed one of the men, recoiling from the foot
of the ladder.

"by jen!" ejaculated the other, in equal surprise.

"good gracious!" gasped the vicar, who, seeing indistinctly a dark
mass lying on the floor, had stooped to examine it, and placed his
hand upon a cold, dead face.

the men drew the body into the streak of light that traversed the
floor.

it was the corpse of toby crooke! there was a frightful scar across
his forehead.

the alarm was given. doctor lincote, and mr. jarlcot, and turnbull, of
the george and dragon, were on the spot immediately; and many curious
and horrified spectators of minor importance.

the first thing ascertained was that the man must have been many hours
dead. the next was that his skull was fractured, across the forehead,
by an awful blow. the next was that his neck was broken.

his hat was found on the floor, where he had probably laid it, with
his handkerchief in it.

the mystery now began to clear a little; for a bell--one of the chime
hung in the tower--was found where it had rolled to, against the wall,
with blood and hair on the rim of it, which corresponded with the
grizzly fracture across the front of his head.

the sack that lay in the vestibule was examined, and found to contain
all the church plate; a silver salver that had disappeared, about a
month before, from dr. lincote's store of valuables; the vicar's gold
pencil-case, which he thought he had forgot in the vestry book; silver
spoons, and various other contributions, levied from time to time off
a dozen different households, the mysterious disappearance of which
spoils had, of late years, begun to make the honest little community
uncomfortable. two bells had been taken down from the chime; and now
the shrewd part of the assemblage, putting things together, began to
comprehend the nefarious plans of the sexton, who lay mangled and dead
on the floor of the tower, where only two days ago he had tolled the
holy bell to call the good christians of golden friars to worship.

the body was carried into the yard of the george and dragon and laid
in the old coach-house; and the townsfolk came grouping in to have a
peep at the corpse, and stood round, looking darkly, and talking as
low as if they were in a church.

the vicar, in gaiters and slightly shovel hat, stood erect, as one in
a little circle of notables--the doctor, the attorney, sir geoffrey
mardykes, who happened to be in the town, and turnbull, the host--in
the centre of the paved yard, they having made an inspection of the
body, at which troops of the village stragglers, to-ing and fro-ing,
were gaping and frowning as they whispered their horrible conjectures.

"what d'ye think o' that?" said tom scales, the old hostler of the
george, looking pale, with a stern, faint smile on his lips, as he and
dick linklin sauntered out of the coach-house together.

"the deaul will hev his ain noo," answered dick, in his friend's ear.
"t' sexton's got a craigthraw like he gav' the lass over the clints of
scarsdale; ye mind what the ald soger telt us when he hid his face in
the kitchen of the george here? by jen! i'll ne'er forget that story."

"i ween 'twas all true enough," replied the hostler; "and the sizzup
he gav' the sleepin' man wi' t' poker across the forehead. see whar
the edge o' t' bell took him, and smashed his ain, the self-same lids.
by ma sang, i wonder the deaul did na carry awa' his corpse i' the
night, as he did wi' tam lunder's at mooltern mill."

"hout, man, who ever sid t' deaul inside o' a church?"

"the corpse is ill-faur'd enew to scare satan himsel', for that
matter; though it's true what you say. ay, ye're reet tul a trippet,
thar; for beelzebub dar'n't show his snout inside the church, not the
length o' the black o' my nail."

while this discussion was going on, the gentlefolk who were talking
the matter over in the centre of the yard had dispatched a message for
the coroner all the way to the town of hextan.

the last tint of sunset was fading from the sky by this time; so, of
course, there was no thought of an inquest earlier than next day.

in the meantime it was horribly clear that the sexton had intended to
rob the church of its plate, and had lost his life in the attempt to
carry the second bell, as we have seen, down the worn ladder of the
tower. he had tumbled backwards and broken his neck upon the floor of
the loft; and the heavy bell, in its fall, descended with its edge
across his forehead.

never was a man more completely killed by a double catastrophe, in a
moment.

the bells and the contents of the sack, it was surmised, he meant to
have conveyed across the lake that night, and with the help of his
spade and pick to have buried them in clousted forest, and returned,
after an absence of but a few hours--as he easily might--before
morning, unmissed and unobserved. he would no doubt, having secured
his booty, have made such arrangements as would have made it appear
that the church had been broken into. he would, of course, have taken
all measures to divert suspicion from himself, and have watched a
suitable opportunity to repossess himself of the buried treasure and
dispose of it in safety.

[illustration: _it was the corpse of toby crooke_!]

and now came out, into sharp relief, all the stories that had, one way
or other, stolen after him into the town. old mrs. pullen fainted when
she saw him, and told doctor lincote, after, that she thought he was
the highwayman who fired the shot that killed the coachman the night
they were robbed on hounslow heath. there were the stories also told
by the wayfaring old soldier with the wooden leg, and fifty others, up
to this more than half disregarded, but which now seized on the
popular belief with a startling grasp.

the fleeting light soon expired, and twilight was succeeded by the
early night.

the inn yard gradually became quiet; and the dead sexton lay alone, in
the dark, on his back, locked up in the old coach-house, the key of
which was safe in the pocket of tom scales, the trusty old hostler of
the george.

it was about eight o'clock, and the hostler, standing alone on the
road in the front of the open door of the george and dragon, had just
smoked his pipe out. a bright moon hung in the frosty sky. the fells
rose from the opposite edge of the lake like phantom mountains. the
air was stirless. through the boughs and sprays of the leafless elms
no sigh or motion, however hushed, was audible. not a ripple glimmered
on the lake, which at one point only reflected the brilliant moon from
its dark blue expanse like burnished steel. the road that runs by the
inn door, along the margin of the lake, shone dazzlingly white.

white as ghosts, among the dark holly and juniper, stood the tall
piers of the vicar's gate, and their great stone balls, like heads,
overlooking the same road, a few hundred yards up the lake, to the
left. the early little town of golden friars was quiet by this time.
except for the townsfolk who were now collected in the kitchen of the
inn itself, no inhabitant was now outside his own threshold.

tom scales was thinking of turning in. he was beginning to fell a
little queer. he was thinking of the sexton, and could not get the
fixed features of the dead man out of his head, when he heard the
sharp though distant ring of a horse's hoof upon the frozen road.
tom's instinct apprized him of the approach of a guest to the george
and dragon. his experienced ear told him that the horseman was
approaching by the dardale road, which, after crossing that wide and
dismal moss, passes the southern fells by dunner cleugh and finally
enters the town of golden friars by joining the mardykes road, at the
edge of the lake, close to the gate of the vicar's house.

a clump of tall trees stood at this point; but the moon shone full
upon the road and cast their shadow backward.

the hoofs were plainly coming at a gallop, with a hollow rattle. the
horseman was a long time in appearing. tom wondered how he had heard
the sound--so sharply frosty as the air was--so very far away.

he was right in his guess. the visitor was coming over the mountainous
road from dardale moss; and he now saw a horseman, who must have
turned the corner of the vicar's house at the moment when his eye was
wearied; for when he saw him for the first time he was advancing, in
the hazy moonlight, like the shadow of a cavalier, at a gallop, upon
the level strip of road that skirts the margin of the mere, between
the george and the vicar's piers.

the hostler had not long to wonder why the rider pushed his beast at
so furious a pace, and how he came to have heard him, as he now
calculated, at least three miles away. a very few moments sufficed to
bring horse and rider to the inn door.

it was a powerful black horse, something like the great irish hunter
that figured a hundred years ago, and would carry sixteen stone with
ease across country. it would have made a grand charger. not a hair
turned. it snorted, it pawed, it arched its neck; then threw back its
ears and down its head, and looked ready to lash, and then to rear;
and seemed impatient to be off again, and incapable of standing quiet
for a moment.

the rider got down

    as light as shadow falls.

but he was a tall, sinewy figure. he wore a cape or short mantle, a
cocked hat, and a pair of jack-boots, such as held their ground in
some primitive corners of england almost to the close of the last
century.

"take him, lad," said he to old scales. "you need not walk or wisp
him--he never sweats or tires. give him his oats, and let him take his
own time to eat them. house!" cried the stranger--in the old-fashioned
form of summons which still lingered, at that time, in out-of-the-way
places--in a deep and piercing voice.

as tom scales led the horse away to the stables it turned its head
towards its master with a short, shill neigh.

"about _your_ business, old gentleman--we must not go too fast," the
stranger cried back again to his horse, with a laugh as harsh and
piercing; and he strode into the house.

the hostler led this horse into the inn yard. in passing, it sidled up
to the coach-house gate, within which lay the dead sexton--snorted,
pawed and lowered its head suddenly, with ear close to the plank, as
if listening for a sound from within; then uttered again the same
short, piercing neigh.

the hostler was chilled at this mysterious coquetry with the dead. he
liked the brute less and less every minute.

in the meantime, its master had proceeded.

"i'll go to the inn kitchen," he said, in his startling bass, to the
drawer who met him in the passage.

and on he went, as if he had known the place all his days: not seeming
to hurry himself--stepping leisurely, the servant thought--but gliding
on at such a rate, nevertheless, that he had passed his guide and was
in the kitchen of the george before the drawer had got much more than
half-way to it.

a roaring fire of dry wood, peat and coal lighted up this snug but
spacious apartment--flashing on pots and pans, and dressers high-piled
with pewter plates and dishes; and making the uncertain shadows of the
long "hanks" of onions and many a flitch and ham, depending from the
ceiling, dance on its glowing surface.

the doctor and the attorney, even sir geoffrey mardykes, did not
disdain on this occasion to take chairs and smoke their pipes by the
kitchen fire, where they were in the thick of the gossip and
discussion excited by the terrible event.

the tall stranger entered uninvited.

he looked like a gaunt, athletic spaniard of forty, burned half black
in the sun, with a bony, flattened nose. a pair of fierce black eyes
were just visible under the edge of his hat; and his mouth seemed
divided, beneath the moustache, by the deep scar of a hare-lip.

sir geoffrey mardykes and the host of the george, aided by the doctor
and the attorney, were discussing and arranging, for the third or
fourth time, their theories about the death and the probable plans of
toby crooke, when the stranger entered.

the new-comer lifted his hat, with a sort of smile, for a moment from
his black head.

"what do you call this place, gentlemen?" asked the stranger.

"the town of golden friars, sir," answered the doctor politely.

"the george and dragon, sir: anthony turnbull, at your service,"
answered mine host, with a solemn bow, at the same moment--so that the
two voices went together, as if the doctor and the innkeeper were
singing a catch.

"the george and the dragon," repeated the horseman, expanding his long
hands over the fire which he had approached. "saint george, king
george, the dragon, the devil: it is a very grand idol, that outside
your door, sir. you catch all sorts of worshippers--courtiers,
fanatics, scamps: all's fish, eh? everybody welcome, provided he
drinks like one. suppose you brew a bowl or two of punch. i'll stand
it. how many are we? _here_--count, and let us have enough. gentlemen,
i mean to spend the night here, and my horse is in the stable. what
holiday, fun, or fair has got so many pleasant faces together? when i
last called here--for, now i bethink me, i have seen the place
before--you all looked sad. it was on a sunday, that dismalest of
holidays; and it would have been positively melancholy only that your
sexton--that saint upon earth--mr. crooke, was here." he was looking
round, over his shoulder, and added: "ha! don't i see him there?"

frightened a good deal were some of the company. all gaped in the
direction in which, with a nod, he turned his eyes.

"he's _not_ thar--he _can't_ be thar--we _see_ he's not thar," said
turnbull, as dogmatically as old joe willet might have delivered
himself--for he did not care that the george should earn the
reputation of a haunted house. "he's met an accident, sir: he's
dead--he's elsewhere--and therefore can't be here."

upon this the company entertained the stranger with the
narrative--which they made easy by a division of labour, two or three
generally speaking at a time, and no one being permitted to finish a
second sentence without finding himself corrected and supplanted.

"the man's in heaven, so sure as you're not," said the traveller so
soon as the story was ended. "what! he was fiddling with the church
bell, was he, and d----d for that--eh? landlord, get us some drink. a
sexton d----d for pulling down a church bell he has been pulling at
for ten years!"

"you came, sir, by the dardale-road, i believe?" said the doctor
(village folk are curious). "a dismal moss is dardale moss, sir; and a
bleak clim' up the fells on t' other side."

"i say 'yes' to all--from dardale moss, as black as pitch and as
rotten as the grave, up that zigzag wall you call a road, that looks
like chalk in the moonlight, through dunner cleugh, as dark as a
coal-pit, and down here to the george and the dragon, where you have a
roaring fire, wise men, good punch--here it is--and a corpse in your
coach-house. where the carcase is, there will the eagles be gathered
together. come, landlord, ladle out the nectar. drink, gentlemen--drink,
all. brew another bowl at the bar. how divinely it stinks of alcohol!
i hope you like it, gentlemen: it smells all over of spices, like a
mummy. drink, friends. ladle, landlord. drink, all. serve it out."

the guest fumbled in his pocket, and produced three guineas, which he
slipped into turnbull's fat palm.

"let punch flow till that's out. i'm an old friend of the house. i
call here, back and forward. i know you well, turnbull, though you
don't recognize me."

"you have the advantage of me, sir," said mr. turnbull, looking hard
on that dark and sinister countenance--which, or the like of which, he
could have sworn he had never seen before in his life. but he liked
the weight and colour of his guineas, as he dropped them into his
pocket. "i hope you will find yourself comfortable while you stay."

"you have given me a bedroom?"

"yes, sir--the cedar chamber."

"i know it--the very thing. no--no punch for me. by and by, perhaps."

the talk went on, but the stranger had grown silent. he had seated
himself on an oak bench by the fire, towards which he extended his
feet and hands with seeming enjoyment; his cocked hat being, however,
a little over his face.

gradually the company began to thin. sir geoffrey mardykes was the
first to go; then some of the humbler townsfolk. the last bowl of
punch was on its last legs. the stranger walked into the passage and
said to the drawer:

"fetch me a lantern. i must see my nag. light it--hey! that will do.
no--you need not come."

the gaunt traveller took it from the man's hand and strode along the
passage to the door of the stableyard, which he opened and passed out.

tom scales, standing on the pavement, was looking through the stable
window at the horses when the stranger plucked his shirtsleeve. with
an inward shock the hostler found himself alone in presence of the
very person he had been thinking of.

"i say--they tell me you have something to look at in there"--he
pointed with his thumb at the old coach-house door. "let us have a
peep."

tom scales happened to be at that moment in a state of mind highly
favourable to anyone in search of a submissive instrument. he was in
great perplexity, and even perturbation. he suffered the stranger to
lead him to the coach-house gate.

"you must come in and hold the lantern," said he. "i'll pay you
handsomely."

the old hostler applied his key and removed the padlock.

"what are you afraid of? step in and throw the light on his face,"
said the stranger grimly. "throw open the lantern: stand _there_.
stoop over him a little--he won't bite you. steady, or you  pass
the night with him!"

       *       *       *       *       *

in the meantime the company at the george had dispersed; and, shortly
after, anthony turnbull--who, like a good landlord, was always last in
bed, and first up, in his house--was taking, alone, his last look
round the kitchen before making his final visit to the stable-yard,
when tom scales tottered into the kitchen, looking like death, his
hair standing upright; and he sat down on an oak chair, all in a
tremble, wiped his forehead with his hand, and, instead of speaking,
heaved a great sigh or two.

it was not till after he had swallowed a dram of brandy that he found
his voice, and said:

"we've the deaul himsel' in t' house! by jen! ye'd best send fo t'
sir" (the clergyman). "happen he'll tak him in hand wi' holy writ, and
send him elsewhidder deftly. lord atween us and harm! i'm a sinfu'
man. i tell ye, mr. turnbull, i dar' n't stop in t' george to-night
under the same roof wi' him."

"ye mean the ra-beyoned, black-feyaced lad, wi' the brocken neb? why,
that's a gentleman wi' a pocket ful o' guineas, man, and a horse worth
fifty pounds!"

"that horse is no better nor his rider. the nags that were in the
stable wi' him, they all tuk the creepins, and sweated like rain down
a thack. i tuk them all out o' that, away from him, into the
hack-stable, and i thocht i cud never get them past him. but that's
not all. when i was keekin inta t' winda at the nags, he comes behint
me and claps his claw on ma shouther, and he gars me gang wi' him, and
open the aad coach-house door, and haad the cannle for him, till he
pearked into the deed man't feyace; and, as god's my judge, i sid the
corpse open its eyes and wark its mouth, like a man smoorin' and
strivin' to talk. i cudna move or say a word, though i felt my hair
rising on my heed; but at lang-last i gev a yelloch, and say i, 'la!
what is that?' and he himsel' looked round on me, like the devil he
is; and, wi' a skirl o' a laugh, he strikes the lantern out o' my
hand. when i cum to myself we were outside the coach-house door. the
moon was shinin' in, ad i cud see the corpse stretched on the table
whar we left it; and he kicked the door to wi' a purr o' his foot.
'lock it,' says he; and so i did. and here's the key for ye--tak it
yoursel', sir. he offer'd me money: he said he'd mak me a rich man if
i'd sell him the corpse, and help him awa' wi' it."

"hout, man! what cud he want o' t' corpse? he's not doctor, to do a'
that lids. he was takin' a rise out o' ye, lad," said turnbull.

"na, na--he wants the corpse. there's summat you a' me can't tell he
wants to do wi' 't; and he'd liefer get it wi' sin and thievin', and
the damage of my soul. he's one of them freytens a boo or a dobbies
off dardale moss, that's always astir wi' the like after nightfall;
unless--lord save us!--he be the deaul himsel.'"

"whar is he noo?" asked the landlord, who was growing uncomfortable.

"he spang'd up the back stair to his room. i wonder you didn't hear
him trampin' like a wild horse; and he clapt his door that the house
shook again--but lord knows whar he is noo. let us gang awa's up to
the vicar's, and gan _him_ come down, and talk wi' him."

"hoity toity, man--you're too easy scared," said the landlord, pale
enough by this time. "'twould be a fine thing, truly, to send abroad
that the house was haunted by the deaul himsel'! why, 'twould be the
ruin o' the george. you're sure ye locked the door on the corpse?"

"aye, sir--sartain."

"come wi' me, tom--we'll gi' a last look round the yard."

so, side by side, with many a jealous look right and left, and over
their shoulders, they went in silence. on entering the old-fashioned
quadrangle, surrounded by stables and other offices--built in the
antique cagework fashion--they stopped for a while under the shadow of
the inn gable, and looked round the yard, and listened. all was
silent--nothing stirring.

the stable lantern was lighted; and with it in his hand tony turnbull,
holding tom scales by the shoulder, advanced. he hauled tom after him
for a step or two; then stood still and shoved him before him for a
step or two more; and thus cautiously--as a pair of skirmishers under
fire--they approached the coach-house door.

"there, ye see--all safe," whispered tom, pointing to the lock, which
hung--distinct in the moonlight--in its place. "cum back, i say!"

"cum on, say i!" retorted the landlord valorously. "it would never do
to allow any tricks to be played with the chap in there"--he pointed
to the coachhouse door.

"the coroner here in the morning, and never a corpse to sit on!" he
unlocked the padlock with these words, having handed the lantern to
tom. "here, keck in, tom," he continued; "ye hev the lantern--and see
if all's as ye left it."

"not me--na, not for the george and a' that's in it!" said tom, with a
shudder, sternly, as he took a step backward.

"what the--what are ye afraid on? gi' me the lantern--it is all one:
_i_ will."

and cautiously, little by little, he opened the door; and, holding the
lantern over his head in the narrow slit, he peeped in--frowning and
pale--with one eye, as if he expected something to fly in his face. he
closed the door without speaking, and locked it again.

"as safe as a thief in a mill," he whispered with a nod to his
companion. and at that moment a harsh laugh overhead broke the silence
startlingly, and set all the poultry in the yard gabbling.

"thar he be!" said tom, clutching the landlord's arm--"in the
winda--see!"

the window of the cedar-room, up two pair of stairs, was open; and in
the shadow a darker outline was visible of a man, with his elbows on
the window-stone, looking down upon them.

"look at his eyes--like two live coals!" gasped tom.

the landlord could not see all this so sharply, being confused, and
not so long-sighted as tom.

"time, sir," called tony turnbull, turning cold as he thought he saw a
pair of eyes shining down redly at him--"time for honest folk to be in
their beds, and asleep!"

"as sound as your sexton!" said the jeering voice from above.

"come out of this," whispered the landlord fiercely to his hostler,
plucking him hard by the sleeve.

they got into the house, and shut the door.

"i wish we were shot of him," said the landlord, with something like a
groan, as he leaned against the wall of the passage. "i'll sit up,
anyhow--and, tom, you'll sit wi' me. cum into the gun-room. no one
shall steal the dead man out of my yard while i can draw a trigger."

the gun-room in the george is about twelve feet square. it projects
into the stable-yard and commands a full view of the old coach-house;
and, through a narrow side window, a flanking view of the back door of
the inn, through which the yard is reached.

tony turnbull took down the blunderbuss--which was the great ordnance
of the house--and loaded it with a stiff charge of pistol bullets.

he put on a great-coat which hung there, and was his covering when he
went out at night, to shoot wild ducks. tom made himself comfortable
likewise. they then sat down at the window, which was open, looking
into the yard, the opposite side of which was white in the brilliant
moonlight.

the landlord laid the blunderbuss across his knees, and stared into
the yard. his comrade stared also. the door of the gun-room was
locked; so they felt tolerably secure.

an hour passed; nothing had occurred. another. the clock struck one.
the shadows had shifted a little; but still the moon shone full on the
old coach-house, and the stable where the guest's horse stood.

turnbull thought he heard a step on the back-stair. tom was watching
the back-door through the side window, with eyes glazing with the
intensity of his stare. anthony turnbull, holding his breath, listened
at the room door. it was a false alarm.

when he came back to the window looking into the yard:

"hish! look thar!" said he in a vehement whisper.

from the shadow at the left they saw the figure of the gaunt horseman,
in short cloak and jack-boots, emerge. he pushed open the stable door,
and led out his powerful black horse. he walked it across the front of
the building till he reached the old coach-house door; and there, with
its bridle on its neck, he left it standing, while he stalked to the
yard gate; and, dealing it a kick with his heel, it sprang back with
the rebound, shaking from top to bottom, and stood open. the stranger
returned to the side of his horse; and the door which secured the
corpse of the dead sexton seemed to swing slowly open of itself as he
entered, and returned with the corpse in his arms, and swung it across
the shoulders of the horse, and instantly sprang into the saddle.

"fire!" shouted tom, and bang went the blunderbuss with a stunning
crack. a thousand sparrows' wings winnowed through the air from the
thick ivy. the watch-dog yelled a furious bark. there was a strange
ring and whistle in the air. the blunderbuss had burst to shivers
right down to the very breech. the recoil rolled the inn-keeper upon
his back on the floor, and tom scales was flung against the side of
the recess of the window, which had saved him from a tumble as
violent. in this position they heard the searing laugh of the
departing horseman, and saw him ride out of the gate with his ghastly
burden.

       *       *       *       *       *

perhaps some of my readers, like myself, have heard this story told by
roger turnbull, now host of the george and dragon, the grandson of the
very tony who then swayed the spigot and keys of that inn, in the
identical kitchen of which the fiend treated so many of the neighbours
to punch.

       *       *       *       *       *

what infernal object was subserved by the possession of the dead
villain's body, i have not learned. but a very curious story, in which
a vampire resuscitation of crooke the sexton figures,  throw a
light upon this part of the tale.

the result of turnbull's shot at the disappearing fiend certainly
justifies old andrew moreton's dictum, which is thus expressed in his
curious "history of apparitions": "i warn rash brands who, pretending
not to fear the devil, are for using the ordinary violences with him,
which affect one man from another--or with an apparition, in which
they  be sure to receive some mischief. i knew one fired a gun at
an apparition and the gun burst in a hundred pieces in his hand;
another struck at an apparition with a sword, and broke his sword in
pieces and wounded his hand grievously; and 'tis next to madness for
anyone to go that way to work with any spirit, be it angel or be it
devil."







